Americans are almost very slow to pick up with American readers, not American fiction writers particularly.
Yeah, it's hard to come to the attention of anyone, unless perhaps they're coming over to promote it.
Have you done any publicity tours here before, or is this basically the first time?
Have you visited the States before?
Yeah, I was in the States 30 years ago.
My family emigrated here to L.A.
But it wasn't successful, and we came back after four months.
This is not you, but this is... Yeah, me and... Have you moved to L.A.?
Yeah, for four months, when I was 17.
But my older brother, he stayed... In California?
In California, but within a couple of years he had moved to New York, and then he was...
He was in the army.
He was in the army during the 60s.
The American army?
Yeah.
And since then he's lived in Long Island.
He has four kids.
So I saw him about four days ago for the first time in 14 years.
Wow.
Including a nephew who I'd never seen before.
And he's an extremely skillful soccer player.
So that was really good.
And what's your brother's name?
Ronald.
Ronald, yeah.
Ronald's been good.
Well, so it's kind of a dichotomy, isn't it?
These pieces that I've read in interviews with you, it's kind of a love-hate relationship that you have with the, and I'm putting quotation marks, around the literary establishment on the one hand, but on the other, the recognition that you get from something such as the Booker Prize, it does help introduce you to the readers, doesn't it?
Yeah, definitely.
I would rather do this.
really, because I feel that I don't have any particular relationship in the sense that the Lafayette comes from your side, I think.
I'm just looking at your tobacco here.
Golden, what is it?
Golden, Virginia.
That's an American tobacco?
No, it's British, but inside it's drum, because it's drum that you get here.
But, yeah, they have a lovely relationship with me more than the other way around.
There's a dichotomy in a way that you wouldn't be considering, really, is that, generally speaking, I get very good reviews from the military establishment, and that's what made the odd situation after the Booker.
It's rather as though the Booker was the final show for people watching from the wings.
Well, of course, we'll be pointing out from people who read my stories that
This is a big deal in England.
I mean, this is almost like the Super Bowl, which is coming up this weekend.
Not quite, but... It extends far.
I mean, the reason even why it's been of interest in the States is because it extends far beyond England.
I should also point out, it extends into my country, which is Scotland.
And also, it goes right across the former Commonwealth.
So, it's the top prize, and also for Canadian leaders.
for Australian writers, for writers from Africa.
Oh, really?
Are they eligible for the book?
Yeah, everyone in the, say, the foreign or commonwealth.
Yeah.
Yeah, so it goes right across a real frame.
As opposed to the National Book Award in this country, or the Pulitzer, it requires you to be an American citizen.
Yeah.
Not this.
I mean, London's the centre of publishing for, not only for the UK, you know,
as other people would aspire to be published in London.
So I think the qualifications are that anyone who's published in the UK, perhaps that's it.
But that's why it makes such news across the world, because it's very important in each literary culture or community in these countries.
And also, I don't know why it's taken off,
But, I mean, it's also, the information's relayed across Europe, too.
So, I had, you know, people making contact from places like Italy and Germany and Holland, you know, Finland.
Wow.
Especially, again, in consequence of the speech, the kind of speech that I made after it.
Mm-hmm.
That was a... Well, it was quite an impassioned speech, as I understand it.
It's what... Tell me a little bit about that.
Well...
I mean, our idea is one like soundbite, as we call it, you know, one quote, that nobody's going to take away your culture or your language.
I mean, you have a right to do this, and maybe you could just kind of pick up on that a little bit.
Right.
So, the point I'm trying to establish was not a nationalist point.
It wasn't a... Well, it wasn't a nationalist.
It wasn't, really.
It was a...it was basically the right of any indigenous culture
The right of any indigenous culture, both to exist and for writers and artists within the culture to use the experiences, the language, et cetera, of that culture in which to create art.
So it took pains to establish that it wasn't a nationalist position, although the implication is also a call for the right of self-determination for small countries, but not only countries, also like
you could say ethnic communities within our country, the same argument that there was no hierarchy within cultures or within languages.
I mean the language that I use is not really described as a language at all, it's called a slang or a vernacular or dialect, all of these kind of inferiorisations.
I'm just thinking in terms of the transcription, though.
Yeah.
Okay, go ahead.
You know, they're always relative to the main language, the dominant language, which is English as it is used by authority, really.
So, in a sense, what I'm doing is no different, really, from what people like Faulconer and others within the American alternative tradition have been doing for a hundred years.
You know, regional writing is
is basically the norm here.
In fact, we'll get to talk a little bit about the book.
Are you familiar with William Kennedy at all, who wrote Iron Weed?
I'm not familiar with the novel.
I've heard about him often since I've been here.
Are others making the comparison to him?
Yeah, I'm really keen to look at his work in.
Well, there are a number of parallels, not just in terms of the concept, the artistic structure, but also in terms of the fact that I've done a number of interviews with Bill Kennedy over the years, and everybody in the world rejected that book.
Nobody wanted to buy it, and finally Saul Bellows said, look, this is a wonderful book.
And one of the reasons was the character is that all the publishers would say to him, who's interested in a trunk, who's interested in a bum, you know?
Who wants to read about some guy down and out who's been drinking for 20 years, and he comes home, and he hallucinates for 10 days, or something like that.
And so there are, you know, and also the fact that it's almost Joyce-ian in the way that, you know, you enter this life.
Coming into the perspective.
Exactly.
I read one interview with you where the writer suggested that this is a stream of consciousness,
back to Jesus Christ, because you're reading this, you know, and maybe you could address yourself to that.
I mean, it suggests that you sort of lack out this thing.
Well, it's good that you say that, you know, as a writer, you'll understand that when people say that, well, there are certain things that get said about me that, and I try and say, look,
You're actually talking to a writer.
If what you see applies, you're giving a writer the bravest, and so you could probably give... Really?
I've got my own galleys for my own book in the bag, by the way.
My book is being published in five months, so we need to thank you for recognizing a kindred spirit.
Well, what happened... I'll give you a really good example now.
The last novel I published, A Disaffection... Which was short-listed.
Short-listed.
It also won another sort of a good kind of award, the James Tate Memorial one, which is...
There's only one book is selected and it's not kind of a competition or such.
Now, after the ceremony, one of the guys who was involved with the selection process, it's a university-based award, so an academic, who likes my work, you know, and he took myself and my wife out for a meal.
And he made the comment that really set me back in my heels up there and he said, do you ever revise?
He's probably revised 150 times.
Well, the interesting thing, again, is, you know, because there are so many... Did he revise?
Yeah.
Did he realise he was insulting you?
But you see, that's part of a whole kind of range that fall into a same set, which is, I mean, if you give them the benefit of the doubt, because you're involved in voice also, as opposed to the literary, they somehow...
cannot bring themselves to bring a literary criteria to evaluate its merit.
It's like the field where they have to get involved in orature or something, you know, and again, all those hierarchies in operation, that the orature is a lower art medium than say literature, you know, because it's basically
It's not educated people who are involved in literature, you know, so there's all these different kind of hierarchies that go to kind of, even in physicality, there's an important issue.
Well, that's right there.
And England, and more so even than here, I mean, it's almost structured, it's almost a caste system.
You know, it's like they can't believe Shakespeare wrote the plays because he didn't go to university, you know.
How could anybody be so smart?
Don't worry about it, the cigarettes don't bother me.
Another thing that's common, a lot of black writers experience precisely the same.
People get surprised that you've actually read Joyce, you know, that kind of thing.
So, in a way, one of the nice things about the States, without kind of romanticising it perhaps, and also because I'm meeting people involved in literature, I suppose, is that they can begin from a point above all that stuff, you know.
And another thing, speaking with a journalist yesterday, who was unable to comprehend what all the hostility and controversy was about... No, I comprehend it very well.
Well, you'll have more knowledge of the workings of the elitism than he has,
Again, in a sense, it's because it is actually a prejudice, and it's not irrational for him.
It's not based in reason, you know?
It's got a lot of things.
It's anger that you probably write so well.
It's having to acknowledge that it's good, that it's beating out more conventional stuff in the whole country.
the fact that you probably don't have a university degree and you're not part of the establishment, and that you maybe even in your own way show a little bit of contempt for them every once in a while.
Yeah.
Yeah, there's a friend of mine, a black friend of mine, who said, Jim, your trouble is your uppity.
And again, it has to do with not being grateful, you know,
It's not enough that they allow you to be published in London, for instance.
Or even the award you the prize, that I didn't wear a bow tie in that evening.
And even that was regarded as kind of a major statement.
Well, I understand that they were suggesting that you should have a tuxedo.
Yeah.
And you said, well, who's buying this for me?
I can't afford it.
Well, I mean, I've been on prize shortlist basically since I started writing.
Or rather, since about eight, my first novel.
which is at 83 or 84.
And I've always tried to make the point on, you know, on behalf of writers in general, you know, that all these publicity deals to do with awards and prizes, and they expect you to travel two or three hundred miles, give over three days out of your working life.
You have to pay most expenses yourself.
You have to buy the proper clothes or hire them.
All of these things are done out of your own pocket.
I mean, most writers have got no money, you know.
Tell me that.
You know, so, I mean... I'm a freelancer, by the way.
I'm not employed by a newspaper.
Well, you know, when you're involved with people who are on regular incomes, you can never comprehend the basic economics, you know.
That would be a kind of really heavy irony, such as, how do I get to London from the long ago?
and who's going to pay.
Yeah, I'll shut this off just for a second, because we don't need this.
Okay, we'll be back on here.
Who is your ideal reader?
Who are you writing these for?
Are you writing for people in Scotland?
Are you writing for people in England?
Are you writing for everybody who reads in the English language?
Tell me a little bit about who you're writing.
Well, the way I operate as a writer is not to bother about the reader at all, really.
It's just to...
The end lies in the actual story itself.
I feel that you have to forget these notions and work out what you're in control of as a writer or what you should be in control of and not kind of get bogged down in what should be a publicity officer's job or something like that.
I think our job is to write the story properly or just to finish the story properly.
and after that it's on its own, really.
You know, you can maybe sell the thing after all, put it into a certain magazine or whatever, but you should never write intentionally for the magazine.
I think it's the healthiest thing to do for writers is to do the stories, and once you've done the stories, then see where you should replace it, for example, if it's individual stories, but not the other way around.
The thing the other way around just needs to compromise is ultimately... But you really, your reader has to...
go halfway.
I mean, you're not presenting something that is easily penetrated, shall we say, or absorbed or entered.
I mean, it does require the attention of the reader, doesn't it?
You mean your compromise is what you say?
Well, I try not to, but I'm not sure how far that's true, but, you know, it's just a case of being as precise as you can.
I think the precision really is about, is it really, you know, and
as precise as possible.
Working the way I am, using language for two purposes, or using rather punctuation for two purposes, say for the grammatical but also for phrasing, almost like a score, directions for a speaking voice.
So there's two ways it's operating.
So to that extent you're kind of in the same situation as maybe a poet, a really good poet might be, you know, using vowel sounds.
If you look at some
just say the red field, but one of these kind of poems, and you realise that I work out that every single bill sounds different, and every bill sounds different, you know, right across.
That kind of precision, so that the reader will never, and this is after the effect, but one of the results or effects of it is
that you're stopping the reader from losing concentration by repetition.
You know, again, another basic part of the writer's craft, repetition.
I get condemned for all these F-words, you know.
Again, one of the gravest insults you could give, that repetition is part of.
Obviously, if we use repetition, there has to be a reason for, there has to be an emphasis of some description.
How do you respond to this criticism?
One of the judges, out of the Book of Price, really, I guess, was a little upset.
Yeah, I mean, you know, even going back to your previous question and taking that question, part of it's the same thing.
As a writer, you hope that your work will be seen in a context that will make it less difficult if you're using an English language in a different way from the norm.
You kind of assume, I think that's the best way of saying it, you assume that the educated critic
has had some experience of the other English language traditions that are relative to the norm, or rather a negating standard English literary form.
I mean, we don't have to stay in the States or in Ireland in Scotland to see it.
We see it happening in all the countries that would be under the Commonwealth Booker Prize thing, you know, in other words, whatever English has been the language of imperial authority and imposition on indigenous culture,
we'll find at this moment in time that this is where writers are moving again.
They're using English.
Okay, a lot of them have to use English.
Some have actually rejected English, like Medugi Wationgo, the Kenyan writer, who has been back to writing in Kukuyu.
And we find in Nigeria, writers like Amos Tutuola using English in really exciting ways.
The rhythms of the languages of his own culture, again, Yoruba, Hauser,
So the phrasing and the syntax is used differently.
We find it also in the Afro... One of the things that I can find odd, I must say, odd, is the lack of awareness of the white people in the States to what's going on with the Afro-American writers.
And even the good academics who are doing really useful work in the kind of things I'm saying, like June Jordan, obviously, is one, you know.
Writers, Bell Hooks is another, you know, who have been very analytic and the best sort of academic, and who are also either poets or writers of fiction.
So these kind of things we're talking about, that's part of the problem.
You sort of assume that there is a context, that this literary context, a tradition, will be known to literary critics, you know.
And also down the line, in fact, it works the other way.
When I'm giving the readings, the last three readings I've given,
in DC, New York, in Boston, the level of sophistication amongst the people who have been in the audience has been what I would have hoped would have come from the critics.
So they are familiar.
Okay, they won't always know, but as soon as I kind of point out, just a point out to the parallels between writers, you know, you can actually see it almost in their faces, you know, just the, of course, of course, of course, you know.
So, I mean, to go back to the Booker, the judge who made these points, I would have assumed, obviously, and especially because the women's Jewish priesthood, she's a rabbi, I mean, part of what I'm talking about was central to the Jewish tradition and literature.
Isaac Singer, he always wrote in Yiddish.
I knew precise, and again, this was an intentional and political position, because that is central, like, in 1840, 1850, at the Mendele Seforum, the bookseller, who was a great... Oh, well, he's one of... I'm going to give us the other guy, you know.
My book is about bibliomania, by the way.
Well, he's one of... I mean, even with Jewish friends, you know, like, one guy was...
But again, as a writer, of course, you move into all the different traditions, but what's especially important, of course, is his insistence in using Yiddish and to get into the experience of the people, you know.
He gave his Nobel lecture in Yiddish.
I didn't even know he won the Nobel Prize.
Oh, you're talking about Singer.
Sorry, I was talking about his set-form.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I thought we came back there.
Yeah, no, but it's the same.
So, I mean, Singer is working in that tradition.
Right.
And the other two major figures, too, I like him, but a much stronger writer, the stronger writer, I think it was his name, who was working around about 1900,
I know who you mean, yeah.
But anyway.
Pettis.
Isaac Pettis.
Oh, okay.
Good.
Yeah.
Tell me the importance of writing a literature as an expression of your culture.
How important it is.
I mean, you are a Scotsman, and that's important.
Yeah.
I mean, could you write
in conventional English prose?
You would find, I think, like, you know, the short stories, and there is a range, you know, again, there's a range of formal themes, not themes, but there's a range of voice and a range of experience that open the stories.
So, I mean, yeah, there are very, especially when I was maybe younger, in my late 20s, early 30s, I did a lot of,
experimentation and exercise work in stories.
And the stories work, you know, about using, uh, that's the kind of things you do, doing pastiches and various things.
So yeah, I mean, yeah.
Do you see your work as a corpus, as a... Yeah.
...everything as part of a scheme?
Yeah, yeah, definitely as a corpus.
And that, again, was one of the things about the Book of Price hostility, again, because
I was treated as though, basically, I had appeared from nowhere by one section of the media, and of course, in the other section, and also these, they knew carefully, of course, there was a corpus of work.
I've published many more than a hundred short stories, and I've published five plays, essays, four novels, you know.
Wow.
But again, the thing is that there is, of course, a political subtext to others.
a discourse that could have taken place and didn't take place.
It was good to have raised questions of the right to self-determination and have these kind of broadcasts from the heart of Imperial England, really.
But there are other issues that could have been raised too, such as things that the central characters involved in, you know, such as
Is this fantasy that someone who's blind cannot have his blindness diagnosed by a doctor?
These are some questions.
If you don't mind jumping to the metaphor of blindness.
I guess where Sammy comes from.
Was it a challenge for you to put yourself into the shoes of a man who all of a sudden can't see you?
Absolutely, because of course the way I operate is not to begin with an idea, you know, so I just begin with start from the woods, you know, and make the story, you know.
I make the story up, that's what storytelling is.
I make the story.
Using the old thing, you know, the maker, so I had no idea the character was going to become blind at all until he, you know, so his grappling
the way he was created, almost by chance.
Yeah.
I guess you saw this confrontation and they beat him up and... I didn't, no, it was just like, so, at the point in the story where he's going, I don't seem able to see it, whatever happens, well, that was like, that was me straight also.
I had no conception of it.
You know, it was basically having to stop occasionally and go, what,
Good God, you know.
The story all of a sudden went from here to there.
Yeah.
It changed.
Well, I'd begun from nowhere anyway, because I'd only begun from playing about with words and carrying through one line, you know, which is how it operates.
It just began in me being depressed and probably hungover and feeling that, you know, I have to go to work today, you know, and sitting down.
The way I began was just to almost like take cognizance of my immediate surroundings, you know.
If a kid bangs in the door, then
that's the opening sentence, or I can't work because I've got a hangover, that becomes the opening sentence for me.
I always try to, there's no such thing as a blank page, you know?
There's no such thing as a blank page?
No, I feel, you know, I do a lot of tutoring, or I have done over the years, and that's about the first thing.
How are you writing these days?
By, by, by... Remote control?
Yeah, well... Do you use a word processor?
Oh yeah, I use J-word processor.
So at once at the point when it has become blind, it's just like you have to go with the invention and be patient, pay attention to detail, work in the concrete, work in the immediate, and don't jump ahead.
No shortcuts.
How long did it take you to write this book?
The two main bursts.
The first burst was about six months, and then I was off for about a year and a half.
and then they brought it to conclusion another six months.
So it was in two, which is fairly short for me, or rather fairly quick.
The novels are usually longer than that.
Um, you're how old now?
Forty-eight.
Yeah.
And I gather that you don't have much formal schooling, is that correct?
Well, what happened was I left school at fifteen, but I actually went to university
When I was 20.
20, 29.
In Glasgow.
Yeah.
I was already published by then.
I'd been published for about four or five years before.
Where did this come from?
Where did the writing come from?
What did you do when you started out of school at 15?
I didn't do it.
Did you work?
Yeah.
Well, yeah, I started work at 15.
I started work as a compositor in the printing trade.
and stuck there for about two years.
After I came back from the States, I couldn't get back in.
The union would not allow me back in.
So then I began the sort of range of jobs that most writers want to put on their page, you know.
So I worked in the construction industry as a labourer, and I worked in factories and driving buses, a number of things, you know.
But I gradually forced myself out of employment.
because my real work was writing.
At what point did this dawn on you, that you had this gift?
Well, I wanted to work on it.
About twenty-one started writing.
Very early twenty-two, I started to write.
And it was fictional, right?
Yeah, yeah.
At the same time I got married, about twenty-two.
I met my wife around the same time,
I was settling down, you know.
Married to the same woman?
Yes, yeah.
All these years, 28 years now?
Well, no, 25 years.
How many?
Two daughters who are 24 and 25.
I've got two daughters, 13 and 12, so I know they're close together.
Yeah, so, well, we were with me at the Booker Prize, my daughters and my wife.
That was one reason why I went, I think.
Very strong support, you know.
Have you had to work through all the years?
I mean, you've got a very impressive list of publishing credits.
Have you had to work through a day job?
No.
My wife and I really began from a partnership, and she kind of was very pragmatic about the whole thing, and knew that she had to be the breadwinner.
You know, the real breadwinner.
And she has accepted this office?
Yeah, so Marie started off in a part-time job, and did night school, and then did day school, and then got to university, and then did a social work course, and has been a social worker for the last 10 years.
And she also went to Glasgow?
At the University of Glasgow?
Yeah, but she's not from Glasgow.
She's originally from Wales, and we met in London.
But she's Welsh?
She's Welsh.
And we met in London, but our people are Canadian.
Wow.
And what's her name?
Her name is Marie.
Marie, yeah.
And the daughters' names are?
Laura and Emma.
Yeah.
So, really, she's been the breadwinner right the way through.
Like most writers or artists, I just, I provide the luxuries.
My wife's a social worker.
She's the supreme.
It's wonderful, isn't it?
Well, one of the things that,
And she's never even, like, she has never had that absolute trust that would allow her to say, oh well, we can rely on him.
She's never been able to do that.
And since the booker, the thing that's allowed hourly, or been good for our relationship really, is that it's allowed her to go part-time for nine months.
She's gone part-time until September.
You know, but she won't go beyond September.
So you're actually carrying a little bit of the load here.
Yeah, for nine months though.
I don't think she trusts it enough to go beyond nine months.
Well, you must have a pretty good advance on the next book by now, I hope.
No, not anyway.
But you have one.
Yeah, I've got one, yeah.
Is it a work in progress or is it done?
Yeah, the publisher assumes it is.
You say what?
The publisher assumes it's a work in progress.
What are you hoping to deliver it?
Well, I should have about two years to deliver, so I've got really plenty of time.
But I wouldn't start back work until April, once all the stuff's by, you know.
Um, talk to me about this, one of the press releases that I've seen identifies you as, as at the vanguard of this, and these are their quotes, this two-wave of,
of the Scottish literary tradition.
Yeah.
Except that... There are... No, in a way, no.
It's fine from the outside, but in Scotland, over the last 20, 25 years, there's been... Right now, there are quite a few good writers around.
Good young writers and good old writers working from similar sets of premises.
but not formally akin, you know, and also writers who are not really known outside of Scotland, but who have also been very influential, not known mainly because they're poets and operating in language that is Scottish in whatever way.
Of course Scotland has quite a wide diverse culture, you know, there's been a lot of immigration to Scotland,
And also, of course, there are the old, the Gaelic, which is still current and in use.
So, obviously, writers working in Gaelic have a very hard time, and also have remained unknown.
The best Scottish writers are totally unknown, basically.
There's an old man of Haiti, Sorley Maclean, who's a Gaelic speaker and uses and writes in Gaelic in the same way the singer did, and for the same reasons.
He's a major poet.
He's genuinely a major poet.
But he'll be known in places like Castilla, or Brittany, in some parts of Europe, some parts of Canada, in some parts of the States.
But generally speaking, he's not known at all.
He's also a tradition bearer, in the way that a singer would want to be.
Talk a little bit about Sammy as a character.
He's likable, certainly.
He's a sympathetic character, but he certainly has his flaws, doesn't he?
Yes.
The difficulty again in the writing was not to fall off the line and make it become sentimental.
I think the bottom line is that he's used to surviving around the lowest ebb possible.
Around the lowest grip?
About the lowest ebb or level.
At that level, I think light blindness just becomes really like another problem to be encountered.
New strategies are to be developed, but you continue to exist, you know, a fear that are not existing.
Is blindness a metaphor for existence for you?
Personally, outside of the novel, I don't know,
Many people prefer to be myopic.
I kind of go along with a great deal of Tromsky's thesis on the myopia of the citizens of our country.
I think that is also part of the reason for the reaction of the hostility, is that people prefer not to see what's under their noses.
They prefer to believe that the people who are hanging around, begging in the street,
are not really 100% people.
They're not really thinking beings, but they're just kind of a... not machines, but things that only kind of act in a behaviourist way, that they don't really have any... Do you see yourself as a spokesman for any certain class or group of people?
No.
I'm against kind of a representative politics altogether, you know.
I do believe in empowerment, you know,
genuine democracy, as opposed to what we get in the West, which is just a charade, you know, whether in your country or my country, it's just a con.
No, I believe in a genuine democracy, i.e.
not representation, the way it's degenerated into.
In the purest sense, then, you see this as a depiction.
Yeah.
As a story telling?
I mean, tell me about the necessity of narrative.
Definitely.
I think
I have strong political opinions and beliefs myself, but it really is, it would be intrusion, and it would be self-indulgent that that would enter into my work.
I mean, that would tie in with the idea of writing for a readership, or writing for an editor, or writing for the market.
That really is intrusion, and it would always act against the story.
I really do regard myself all I've ever wanted to do.
Like the Carlos Williams thing, I wanted to write a poem.
That's basically it.
I just want to write stories, you know, and from an early age, and that's the way it is now, and it's just getting deeper and deeper into it and expanding it out the way, you know, going deeply into it to kind of come out the way.
Are you a strong believer when that story emerges from character?
Are your novels, stories, character driven or fraud driven?
They're certainly not plot driven.
They can't be because of the methodology I use.
They begin from character and being faced by the outside world.
So if I want to begin a new story, there are different devices I use.
One of the most important ones is to take a character for a walk.
Just take the character for a walk and stay in the immediate past.
In other words, don't be bothered using the present tense.
I say to him, you know that kind of crap.
All you have to do is think of the act of saying what is happening sets a thing in the past, that immediate past.
And then your character, you're open for anything.
The kind of brute reality of what's going on in the world will hit you.
You'll act upon it and be acted upon.
So the character in that situation is what drives the story, and also gives it its drama and its mystery, because it's not plotted.
You don't know anybody like Cary.
Cary's a total invention.
Yeah, total invention.
It was more difficult for, you see again, if you know more of work, being able to handle a character that's blind,
as a kind of extension of how I've been operating in the narrative for ten years, which I began from a point, or rather not, well in the novels I began from a point of trying to write a kind of value-free prose, in the same way that Gertrude Stein was after Rob Greer, some of the French writers, trying to find a way of not having value, you know,
trying to strip things right down, almost as the presentation of a fact, in a way that Kafka does.
Kafka also does that.
It seems to me that you do a tremendous amount of reading.
Well, I have done, I don't seem to do it these days, but again, reading as a writer reading, in a way, so the things that you pick up further intuitively, or occasionally just seeing something that a writer does, so maybe a close reading is more
Are you mindfully influenced by other writers, or do you think it's more... No, I'm not.
...a closest kind of a thing?
Yeah, I think what happens is, retrospectively, and it can be different periods.
If you look back and see a story you wrote maybe 10, 15 years ago, and you think, Christ, I must have been reading Dostoevsky then, you know?
Or, I must have been reading, you know?
So, especially, I think, when you're younger,
You know, because you find these exciting new ways of doing things.
As a craftsman, basically, you become, God, you know, I could do this.
You find a way, even basic things like how to move on a day later without saying, all that day he was in a huff.
You might say you published a huff, about a hundred stories or so.
More than that, yeah.
How many novels?
Four, this is a four.
Do you like to do a story, do a couple stories, do a novel, or do you basically like writing that?
I like to have a lot of work in process, and a lot of it will never be around after I'm dead, you know.
But I don't throw anything away.
And even occasionally a story may develop differently from the first couple of pages, and you may get rid of the first couple of pages, but I would keep that.
and use it again, you know, because occasionally you can make stories, more stories like, you know, Chekhov or Flannery O'Connor is another one who you'll see, like... I love Flannery O'Connor.
Yeah, but you know, there are a couple of stories of Flannery O'Connor where you'll see where the same kind of motivation or impulse that didn't quite develop in that way has given rise to another story.
I did interview with Megan Gordomar a couple of months ago.
And she says, it's amazing that she finds, to look at, I asked her the same question, does she see it as a corpus and as a body of work?
She says, oh, absolutely.
She says, in fact, it's almost the same thing written over and over again.
It's like walking around.
You think you've done everything from this side, but then you walk around and see it from that side.
And maybe it is an exploration of the same thing.
Yeah, yeah.
The body of work.
Yeah.
It was an interesting conversation like that.
Yeah, well, again, the corpus, again, it's what you assume as a writer.
I mean, it's so kind of, it's not foolish, but it's impractical.
It's to assume that everyone who interviews, every critic or every reader, is intimately aware of the corpus, you know, which, of course, is not the case.
But if that were true, the idea of the... I would hope that's true, at some point.
Do you have a sense of where you'd like to see this all go?
I mean... No.
As a writer, again, you... You certainly have a sense of your life, though.
Yeah, yeah.
It's not an idle pursuit, I mean... Yeah.
No, no.
I mean, there was a politics to it many years ago, even in trying to subvert narrative for them.
I was kind of aware of
being angry because I was not being allowed as a young writer to do certain things.
So I was very much aware of that.
You know, I was writing in kind of phonetic transcription when I was 25, and I stopped doing it for about 15 years.
I've gradually more and more returned to it.
Well, I'll tell you, I think we've got a lot of stuff here.
We've come out of ground pretty quickly.
Anything else that you feel that I've...
I'm not sure.
I've got a lot of material for it.
Yeah?
Let's do this again.
You're talking about a fellow named Roland Comstock from Missouri?
Yeah, well, yeah, Romans are loyal, you know.
Do you know where in Missouri, what town?
St.
Louis, Kansas City?
No, and it's not.
How do you know about that?
Well, he collects certain contemporary writers, and has been for a while, you know, so I'm one of the writers that he collects.
So you've known him for some time, so there's been a power in abundance?
Four years since he, yeah.
So, you know, well, this will include
rare magazines and where I produced maybe an essay or a short story.
There was also a guy last night here in Boston who also is a collector.
These people I'm basically writing about very to the ultimate degree with, but why does Comstock impress you?
he would fly to see you?
Well, yeah, it wouldn't obviously just be me.
I know that he collected Burgess and, you know, Alastair Graves.
He also collects Salman Rushdie.
So he likes... It's contemporary.
But not necessarily American writers.
No, not at all.
Not American writers, as you just mentioned.
Yeah, well, I'm sure he collects American writers, too.
Does he impress you as being obsessed?
No, he doesn't at all.
I mean, I don't think any lawyer would impress as being obsessed, really.
He doesn't know, but he, as a self, kind of a, well, describing himself as a completist, indicates that he is a good ironic.
Yeah.
Meaning he wants everything.
But, again, you know, I mean, you wouldn't do that unless it was with a nice irony, you know, so.
I liked Roland, but he's business-like.
You've met him before?
This was the first time I'd met him, but he'd corresponded before, and I was asking, you know, he'd occasionally send books over to Britain for me to sign that he managed to get.
And he fooled from where to where, from Missouri?
From Missouri up to D.C.
To Washington, D.C., so that's a pretty good flight.
That's quite across the country.
Yeah, so he said maybe a 3,000 mile round trip or something.
And of course, how many books did he ask you to sign?
Oh, I lost count.
I don't know.
He brought a whole lot of them on the strip?
Yeah.
How many would you think?
Ten?
Oh no, I've got more than that.
More than that, yeah.
More than that.
I can't believe books.
A lot of the same books?
A couple of the same ones, some of the same ones, yeah, but mainly... But they all being signed or just being signed?
Just being signed, yeah.
Do you think he's selling them?
No.
No, I don't, not at all.
I know that he would know about what was on in the literary auction.
My sense is if he brings a box of the same books, and he's asking just to sign them, not to inscribe them to a certain person.
Some of them scribes, some of them.
It almost sounds as if he's in the business.
No, I wouldn't do that.
Check it out.
I'll never get in my book.
My book's closing on Monday.
But let me just write down your tobacco here.
We call it Golden Virginia.
Yeah.
It's hand-rolling tobacco.
And it's a British blend, right?
Yeah.
I've been smoking that since I was 21, you know.
And that doesn't scare you at all?
Well, I gave up for seven years.
I just started smoking again four years ago.
Well, how come?
I used to smoke cigars.
I loved them.
Not all pressure, it's also just kind of, I enjoy smoking.
You said you like to party a little bit, I gather, too.
Well, I like to occasionally just go and have a few beers.
Well, I explain to people, too, that if you're a writer, most of what you do is you're in a house working on your own and not wanting to be disturbed.
That's why I like even doing readings in the house.
You're meeting people.
You don't always meet people.
But also I like to go to pubs.
My wife says she can't understand why I like to go to the post office every day.
Or I like to go to the landfill.
Go ahead.
What's been good is obviously the general interest has been good.
The individual interest from a lot of people and also very knowledgeable about my work.
I've found that it's been
It's been quite exciting and, what do you say, night is a nice thing, you know.
People do know quite a lot of my work has managed to get in the States.
It's kind of pleasing, isn't it?
Very, yeah, very.
And also a lot of the younger... I mean, to be perfectly frank, the people that I usually, that I know see in the States, writers are generally black.
You know, that's who I meet.
I'm friendly with the no, and I don't usually meet radical or white people often with the same politics that I have, you know.
It's not like being South Africa by any means.
But again, it's just nice to meet people who have good beliefs, you know, strong views, especially amongst the younger people, you know.
I mean, on a personal level,
One of the things that isn't so good, but not surprising, is that very few Afro-American people come to the readings amongst the audience.
It's mainly all white people.
It's one of these things that is noticeable.
I'm not so sure that it's a major literary issue.
Put it right here.